---
layout: post
title: TCP flags
tags: networking,tcp,tcp flags
---
## **What are TCP flags?**
**TCP flags** are used within TCP packet transfers to indicate a particular connection state or provide additional information. Therefore, they can be used for troubleshooting purposes or to control how a particular connection is handled.

### **List of TCP flags:**
#### **SYN (Synchronisation flag)**
>used as a first step in establishing a 3-way handshake between two hosts. Only the first packet from both the sender and receiver should have this flag set.

#### **ACK (Acknowledgement)**
>used to acknowledge the successful receipt of a packet.

#### **FIN (Finished)**
>means there is no more data from the sender. Therefore, it is used in the last packet sent from the sender.

#### **URG (Urgent)**
>is used to notify the receiver to process the urgent packets before processing all other packets. The receiver will be notified when all known urgent data has been received.

#### **PSH (Push)**
>is somewhat similar to the URG flag and tells the receiver to process these packets as they are received instead of buffering them.

#### **RST (Reset)**
>sent from the receiver to the sender when a packet is sent to a particular host that was not expecting it.  

#### **Example of using tcpdump command to troubleshoot network connections:**

tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 32 !=0' #URG
tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 16 !=0' #ACK
tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 8 !=0' #PSH  
tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 4 !=0' #RST  
tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 2 !=0' #SYN
tcpdump 'tcp[13] & 0 !=0' FIN

### **Another way of using tcpdump command:**

tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-urg != 0' #URG
tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-ack != 0' #ACK
tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-push != 0' #PSH
tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-rst != 0' #RST
tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-sync != 0' #SYN
tcpdump 'tcp[tcpflags] & tcp-fin != 0' #FIN
